docs: add RBTC–USDT0 Cross-Chain Lending Starter Kit documentation (#439)
rsksmart/devportal: docs/02-developers/09-use-cases/defi/cross-chain-lending-rbtc.md

---
sidebar_label: Cross-Chain RBTC Lending Starter Kit
sidebar_position: 3
title: Build a Cross-Chain Lending dApp using rBTC & USDT0 on Rootstock  
description: 'A minimal rBTC-collateralized lending starter kit for Rootstock. Includes mock oracle integration, USDT0 ERC-20 support, and guidance for extending the system with LayerZero and Umbrella/RedStone price feeds.'
tags: [rsk, rootstock, rbtc, usdt0, lending, cross-chain, layerzero, umbrella, redstone, smart contracts, tutorials]
---

:::info[Info]

> This is the **comprehensive tutorial** for the rBTC-USDT0 cross‑chain lending starter kit.

Reviewer: Please link the starter kit here, with rsksmart as the ref

Author: Okay. Done. But the rsksmart link is not available yet.

:::

## Introduction

This guide walks you through building, deploying, and using a minimal over‑collateralized lending protocol on Rootstock. Whether you're an Ethereum developer exploring Bitcoin‑backed DeFi or new to Rootstock, this hands‑on tutorial covers everything: from cloning the code to interacting with the deployed contracts via a UI.

No prior knowledge of LayerZero or cross‑chain protocols is required. We'll explain every architectural decision and code pattern, with a particular focus on the teleport‑style messaging model that powers collateral transfer, the oracle routing pattern that separates price feeds from lending logic, and the Loan‑to‑Value (LTV) solvency checks that protect the protocol.

> By the end of this tutorial you will have:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By the end of this tutorial, you will have:
```

}

```

* **Adapters:** `UmbrellaOracleAdapter` implements the `IPriceOracle` interface and wraps the Umbrella on‑chain reader. It normalizes decimals and enforces `MAX_DELAY`. A `FixedPriceOracle` simply returns a hard‑coded value and is used for testnet demonstrations.

These contracts, together with a handful of mocks (`MockLZEndpoint`, `MockUSDT0`, etc.), make up the entire logic of the starter kit. Supporting contracts include mocks for testing and a simple React frontend that consumes the deployed contracts. A high‑level diagram is shown as follows:

![Figure 3: High-level Illustration of Contract Interaction](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c4fba95d-0f8f-4dc8-b11c-1baa38ba3476)

*Figure 3: High-level illustration of contract interaction*

## Prerequisites

Install the following tools before you begin. Versions shown are examples; newer versions are usually fine.

* **Git:** `git --version` should print ≥ 2.20
* **Node.js:** v18 or later (`node -v`)
* **npm or yarn:** package manager
* **Hardhat:** installed locally (no global install needed)
* **MetaMask:** or similar Web3 wallet, configured with Rootstock testnet

  
## Cloning and initial setup

> Start by cloning the repository and moving into it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clone the repository and cd into it:
```

Author: Thanks.

```bash

> git clone https://github.com/entuziaz/rbtc-usdt0-crosschain-starter-kit.git

Reviewer: ```suggestion
git clone https://github.com/rsksmart/rbtc-usdt0-crosschain-starter-kit.git
```

cd rbtc-usdt0-crosschain-starter-kit
```

  

The project root contains a Hardhat config, scripts, contracts, tests, and a `frontend/` subdirectory for the React UI.
  

## Environment configuration

> Create a `.env` file in the project root. This file is ignored by git and will store sensitive data such as keys and RPC URLs.

Reviewer: Here, you can refer the user to copy and paste the sample .env.example, makes it easier

Author: Alright.

Author: Yeah, makes sense.

* **`crosschain/CrossChainBorrow.test.js`:** end‑to‑end cross‑chain borrow flow using mocked LayerZero endpoints.

The mocks directory contains `MockLZEndpoint.sol`, `MockOracle.sol`, `MockUSDT0.sol` etc., which simulate external systems so tests can run quickly offline. Example invocation of a single file:

```bash
npx hardhat test test/crosschain/CrossChainBorrow.test.js
```

All tests should pass. If they fail, delete `artifacts/` and `cache/` and try again. Sometimes stale compiled artifacts cause mismatch errors.

## Deployment walkthrough

### Deploy script

`scripts/deploy.js` deploys the protocol contracts in order:

1. `OracleRouter` and either `FixedPriceOracle` or `UmbrellaOracleAdapter` depending on `USE_FIXED_ORACLE`
2. `MockUSDT0` (if `USE_MOCK_USDT0` is true) and mints an initial supply
3. `LendingPool` and deploys `LZReceiver` with an unlinked pool address
4. Links the receiver to the pool via `receiver.setLendingPool(lendingPool.address)`
5. Optionally seeds the pool with USDT0 for testing

All addresses printed by the script are needed for the frontend.
  
```bash

> npx hardhat run scripts/deploy.js --network rsktest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
npx hardhat run scripts/deploy.js --network  rootstock_testnet
```

Author: Thanks for pointing that out.

```solidity
usdt0.approve(address(pool), 100 * 1e6);
pool.repayUSDT0(100 * 1e6);
```  

The contract reduces the stored debt amount accordingly.

### Collateral withdrawal

Users may withdraw rBTC as long as the resulting position remains solvent:

```solidity
pool.withdrawRBTC(0.01 ether);
```

Internally this triggers the same `_isSolvent` check with the reduced collateral amount.

### Solvency math

Solvency is maintained using a fixed LTV expressed in basis points (BPS). The internal check is:

```text
debtUSD ≤ collateralUSD × (LTV / 10,000)
```

Where collateralUSD = collateralRBTC × RBTC_USD_price and debtUSD = debtUSDT0 × $1 (invariant). The `LendingPool` implements the logic in `_isSolvent` which is used during borrow and withdrawal operations.

### One‑time receiver wiring

`LZReceiver` is deployed without a pool address. After deployment the owner must link it:

```solidity
receiver.setLendingPool(lendingPool.address);
```

This two‑step process prevents misconfiguration during deployment.

## Oracle setup and pricing model

The protocol distinguishes between **market assets** (rBTC) and **accounting units** (USDT0). Only market assets require external price feeds.

> ### Price sources

Reviewer: The table is broken, not rendering properly

Author: Oops! The blank lines.

Author: Fixed.

* **Testnet oracle availability:** Umbrella price feeds are often unavailable on Rootstock testnet; the fixed oracle is used instead. On testnet `getPrice()` may revert, and the UI switches to a default value. This is why the deployment script exposes `USE_FIXED_ORACLE`.
* **Mocked messaging:** the `MockLZEndpoint` in tests does not represent a real bridge. Cross‑chain behaviour is simulated; your production system must deploy real LayerZero endpoints and manage assets accordingly.
* **No liquidations:** there is no mechanism to seize collateral. Under‑collateralized positions simply block further borrowing or withdrawals.
* **No interest or governance:** debt does not accrue interest, and there is no on‑chain administration beyond the owner of the router and receiver.
* **Faucet restrictions:** Rootstock testnet faucet limits to ≈0.001 rBTC/day, so the `devDepositRBTC()` helper and small borrow amounts exist to work around this.

These limitations are deliberate for educational clarity; the tutorial explains how to remove each one when moving toward production.

## Security considerations

The README's security section is reproduced here with extra context:

> * **Role isolation**: only `LZReceiver` may call `depositRBTC` thanks to the `onlyDepositor` modifier. Do **not** set this to an EOA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Role isolation**: Only `LZReceiver` may call `depositRBTC`, made possible by the `onlyDepositor` modifier. Do **not** set this to an EOA.
```

* **Oracle staleness**: adapters enforce `MAX_DELAY` to avoid using outdated prices. Adjust this to match your feed's heartbeat.

> * **Bridge trust**: the protocol assumes real liquidity backing the teleport messages. In practice, ensure the `LendingPool` holds enough USDT0 to cover all deposits before going public.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Bridge trust**: The protocol assumes real liquidity backing the teleport messages. In practice, ensure the `LendingPool` holds enough USDT0 to cover all deposits before going public.
```

Reviewer: Maybe its better to use mainnet, instead of public?

Author: Okay. 👍🏼

> * **No liquidations**: this starter kit has no mechanism for taking collateral when positions become unsafe. For production you must implement a `liquidate()` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **No liquidations**: This starter kit has no mechanism for taking collateral when positions become unsafe. For production, it is recommended to implement a `liquidate()` function.
```

> * **No interest rates**: borrowed amounts do not accrue interest. Add your own rate model if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **No interest rates**: Borrowed amounts do not accrue interest. Add your own rate model if needed.
```

* **Owner privileges**: the owner (or multisig) of `OracleRouter` can change oracles. Protect this key vigorously.

> > 🔐 **Important**: this code is **not audited**. Treat it as educational scaffolding; do not deploy it with real funds without extensive review and modifications.

Reviewer: You can use the admonition component in this case: https://dev.rootstock.io/components/#admonitions

Author: Yeah. Cool.

  

## Troubleshooting and tips

> * **Tests failing after ABI changes:** delete `artifacts/` and `cache/` then recompile (`npx hardhat compile`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Tests failing after ABI changes:** delete the artifacts/ and cache/ then recompile (`npx hardhat compile`).
```

Reviewer: Kindly use backticks for only necessary functions, etc. As a lot of backticks, makes it hard to read, see: https://devportal-rootstock-cpp28tvt7-iov-labs-mkt.vercel.app/developers/use-cases/defi/cross-chain-lending-rbtc/

Author: Alright. Gotten.

* **Deployment errors:** confirm that your `.env` private key has rBTC on testnet (`npx hardhat account` shows balances). The public faucet limits 0.001 rBTC/day.

> * **Frontend shows `contract not deployed`:** double‑check addresses in `frontend/.env` and recompile if necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Frontend shows `contract not deployed`:** double‑check addresses in frontend/.env and recompile if necessary.
```

* **Oracle price reverts on testnet:** Umbrella feeds are often unavailable on testnet. Use fixed oracle mode or deploy your own data feed.

## FAQ & next steps

**Q: Can I add interest or liquidations?**

A: Yes. The pool has hooks (`onCollateralChanged`, `onDebtChanged`) that you can extend. Add a `liquidate()` method that allows third parties to close under‑collateralized accounts.

**Q: How do I support another source chain?**

A: Deploy `LZSender` on your chosen chain with the appropriate LZ endpoint. Configure the `receiver.setTrustedRemote` mapping on Rootstock with the sender's address and chain ID.

**Q: What is USDT0?**

A: USDT0 is a protocol‑defined accounting unit equal to one U.S. dollar. It is not an ERC‑20 token; the `LendingPool` simply tracks numerical balances. MockUSDT0 is provided for tests and the frontend.

**Q: Can I move to Rootstock mainnet?**

A: Yes. Update `ROOTSTOCK_RPC_URL` to a mainnet node, change `USE_FIXED_ORACLE` to `false`, and ensure you have real rBTC. Mainnet Umbrella feeds will be available for live pricing.

**Next steps & roadmap**

> 1. **Liquidations:** implement and test a liquidation mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Liquidations:** Implement and test a liquidation mechanism.
```

> 2. **Interest rate model:** add utilisation‑based rates for borrowed USDT0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Interest rate model:** Add utilisation‑based rates for borrowed USDT0.
```

> 3. **Multi‑asset support:** enable multiple collateral tokens using the same router pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Multi‑asset support:** Enable multiple collateral tokens using the same router pattern.
```

> 4. **Stargate/OFT integration:** explore LayerZero's Omnichain Fungible Token standard for asset bridging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Stargate/OFT integration:** Explore LayerZero's Omnichain Fungible Token standard for asset bridging.
```

:::info[Credit]

> 1. This tutorial and [starter kit](https://github.com/entuziaz/rbtc-usdt0-crosschain-starter-kit) were originally created by [@entuziaz](https://github.com/entuziaz) during the Rootstock Hacktivator program. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. This tutorial and [starter kit](https://github.com/rsksmart/rbtc-usdt0-crosschain-starter-kit) were originally created by [@entuziaz](https://github.com/entuziaz) during the Rootstock Hacktivator program. 
```

---
sidebar_label: Cross-Chain RBTC Lending Starter Kit
sidebar_position: 3

> title: Cross-Chain rBTC-Backed Lending & USDT0 Stablecoin Starter Kit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Build a Cross-Chain Lending dApp using rBTC & USDT0 on Rootstock
```

Author: Alright

description: 'A minimal rBTC-collateralized lending starter kit for Rootstock. Includes mock oracle integration, USDT0 ERC-20 support, and guidance for extending the system with LayerZero and Umbrella/RedStone price feeds.'

> tags: [rsk, rootstock, lending, cross-chain, layerzero, umbrella, redstone, smart contracts, tutorials]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: [rsk, rootstock, rbtc, usdt0, lending, cross-chain, layerzero, umbrella, redstone, smart contracts, tutorials]
```

---

> # RBTC-USDT0 Cross‑Chain Starter‑Kit Guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> This document is the **comprehensive tutorial** for the rBTC-USDT0 cross‑chain lending starter kit.

> ## Table of Contents

Reviewer: You can remove the table of content header here as the docs, already provides a way to navigate the content

Author: Okay

* Built a mental model for extending the starter kit toward production

A screenshot of the finished UI (the target end‑state for this guide) is shown below:

![Screenshot of the demo dApp](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6a27ce27-d680-437a-82c2-1b8538e16569)

*Figure 1: Demo dApp UI after a successful borrow (rBTC 0.00025 collateral, 1 USDT0 debt, $65k rBTC price).*

Below is an architecture illustration showing the high-level system flow:

![Project architecture illustration](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1e288f88-29d2-4ad3-926b-5bb5b5ba3203)

*Figure 2: Cross-chain lending architecture from source chain deposit to destination chain borrowing on Rootstock.*

## Why build on Rootstock?

Rootstock (RSK) is an L2 solution secured by Bitcoin's mining power. Key benefits for developers:

* **Bitcoin compatibility:** smart contracts can rely on rBTC and the Bitcoin security model.
* **EVM compatibility:** use the same Solidity, Hardhat, ethers.js, Metamask, etc.
* **Low fees & high throughput:** test cheaply and scale without congestion.
* **Open source tooling:** the entire stack is public and free to use.

> This starter kit demonstrates a cross‑chain over‑collateralized lending flow that leverages RSK's features while remaining easy to understand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This starter kit demonstrates a cross‑chain over‑collateralized lending flow that leverages Rootstock's features while remaining easy to understand.
```

![Figure 3: High-level Illustration of Contract Interaction](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c4fba95d-0f8f-4dc8-b11c-1baa38ba3476)

*Figure 3: High-level illustration of contract interaction*

## Prerequisites

Install the following tools before you begin. Versions shown are examples; newer versions are usually fine.

* **Git:** `git --version` should print ≥ 2.20
* **Node.js:** v18 or later (`node -v`)
* **npm or yarn:** package manager
* **Hardhat:** installed locally (no global install needed)
* **MetaMask:** or similar Web3 wallet, configured with Rootstock testnet

  
## Cloning and initial setup

Start by cloning the repository and moving into it:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/entuziaz/rbtc-usdt0-crosschain-starter-kit.git
cd rbtc-usdt0-crosschain-starter-kit
```

  

The project root contains a Hardhat config, scripts, contracts, tests, and a `frontend/` subdirectory for the React UI.
  

## Environment configuration

Create a `.env` file in the project root. This file is ignored by git and will store sensitive data such as keys and RPC URLs.

```text
# .env
PRIVATE_KEY=0xYOUR_TESTNET_PRIVATE_KEY # account that will deploy contracts

> ROOTSTOCK_RPC_URL=https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co

Reviewer: Kindly update the env to use the RPC API Testnet URL https://rpc.rootstock.io/ both on the starter kit and docs

Author: Okay. I'll do just that.

LZ_ENDPOINT=0xB6318... # LayerZero testnet endpoint for RSK
USE_FIXED_ORACLE=true # force deterministic pricing on testnet
USE_MOCK_USDT0=true # deploy a mock USDT0 token
LTV_BPS=7000 # 70% Loan-to-Value ratio (in basis points)
```

> > ⚠️ Never commit this file. In production you would use a secrets manager or hardware wallet.

Reviewer: https://dev.rootstock.io/components/#admonitions

5. Optionally seeds the pool with USDT0 for testing

All addresses printed by the script are needed for the frontend.
  
```bash
npx hardhat run scripts/deploy.js --network rsktest
```

A sample output looks like:

```
Deploying with: 0x...

OracleRouter: 0x...
Fixed Oracle: 0x...
RBTC oracle registered

Mock USDT0: 0x...
Minted 1,000,000 USDT0 to deployer

LZReceiver: 0x...
LendingPool: 0x...
Receiver linked to LendingPool

Seeded pool with 500,000 USDT0
Deployment complete ✅
```
> Addresses will vary; keep them for the frontend or explorer verification.

#### Verifying on Explorer

Optionally verify contracts on the Rootstock testnet explorer:

```bash
npx hardhat verify --network rsktest <ADDRESS> "<constructor args>"
```

### Manual setup of environment variables for frontend

After deployment, create a `.env` file inside `frontend/` with the contract addresses:
  

```text
VITE_ORACLE_ROUTER="0x..."
VITE_LENDING_POOL="0x..."
VITE_USDT0="0x..." # only if using mock USDT0
```

This file is read by Vite during build.

## Using the frontend dApp

The React app illustrates a full deposit/borrow/repay cycle.

Start it by running:

> ```bash

Reviewer: Please separate the text info (cd frontend, what is the env for?) from the `npm run dev`.

Also note that there's a typo here

cd frontend
env
pm run dev # launches at http://localhost:3000
```

1. Open the URL in your browser.

> 2. Connect MetaMask (make sure the network is set to RSK Testnet).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Connect MetaMask (make sure the network is set to Rootstock Testnet).
```
